[DPE-3253] Charmed Spark tutorial (#87)
canonical/spark-client-snap: docs/tutorial/spark-tutorial/t-setup.md

Reviewer: **suggestion** I believe it would be beneficial to split this setup in subchapters relating to the different parts, e.g. 

* MicroK8s
* Juju
* S3 Bucket

This should also visually help the reader understand the different components

Reviewer: **suggestion** Also, on setting up the environment, a nice idea could also be to use multipass, we done [here](https://charmhub.io/postgresql/docs/t-setup-environment). 

I don't mind that much TBH, either way is fine by me, but I felt worth providing the link and the suggestion

Author: I've split the section into subsections. Regarding Multipass, I think the tutorial will be simpler without it since it will add one extra thing to be setup during the setup phase.

## Setup Environment for the Tutorial

> This tutorial takes the demonstration on Charmed Spark by Paolo Sottovia at Ubuntu Summit 2023 as its reference. The video demonstration for this tutorial can be viewed on YouTube via [this link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nu1ll7VRqbI).

Reviewer: I would remove Paolo's name here, but we can keep the link. Actually you could place the link in the Intro, rather than the setup. However I would just phrase it slightly like (hopefully Paolo's egocentrism will forgive me... :D )

```
Parts of this tutorial were originally covered in a talk of the Ubuntu Summit 2023, which recording are available at <link>. Code is available [here](linkt to the repo). 
```

Since if we will ever modify anything in the tutorial

Reviewer 2: I totally agree

Author: Noted. I've even moved this part all the way to the end (further references section) because I think it would suit there better. Please let me know if you think otherwise.

The resources that will be used during this tutorial are available at [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/welpaolo/ubuntu-summit-2023). Let's clone that repository onto our machine.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/welpaolo/ubuntu-summit-2023.git
cd ubuntu-summit-2023

> ```

Reviewer: **question** Why do we need the repository? I would not close the repo otherwise we will always need to make sure that the repository (also in a personal namespace and not canonical!) is always up to date. 

I also prefer to have the tutorial self-contained, and walk the user through it, rather than using an already existing repository

Reviewer: While reading through, I have noticed that we may need the `setup_bucket.py` script. Probably it would be best to include the script in this repo, such that we can easily manage it. @welpaolo What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I definitely think that we need to have all the resources needed inside the repository. In principle, I can change the material on my repository or delete it and the tutorial will be no longer consistent.

Author: I've removed the need for the repository altogether, even the `setup_bucket.py` part. The bucket can be setup using AWS CLI which will be configured during the environment setup.

Charmed Spark is developed to be run on top of a Kubernetes cluster. In this tutorial we use [MicroK8s](https://microk8s.io/), which is the simplest production-grade conformant K8s.

Before starting, it's always a good idea to update the packages in the system.

```bash
sudo apt update

> sudp apt upgrade

Reviewer 2: Typo `sudo`

> ```

Reviewer: Although I agree it is good to do that, I don't think it is really required and it is a bit off the scope. However, I believe it could be good to write (possibly in the introduction) that we recommend to run this tutorial on Ubuntu 22.04+.

Author: Removed.

MicroK8s can be installed via Snap as

```bash
sudo snap install microk8s -channel=1.28-strict/stable
```

> Please note that we're installing the strictly confined version of the MicroK8s snap, because the non-confined one no longer works with Juju (starting from Juju 3.x onwards).

Reviewer: Uhm, maybe it is really not relevant to point this out for a beginner user (since otherwise we shall explain what confined is). I believe it is fine to just tell the user to install the versions they are told to.

Author: This has been removed.

Let's configure MicroK8s for use in this tutorial:

```bash
# Set an alias 'kubectl' that can be used instead of microk8s.kubectl
sudo snap alias microk8s.kubectl kubectl

# Add the current user into 'microk8s' group

> sudo usermod -a -G microk8s ${USER}

Reviewer 2: Are you sure about this command ? 
if you are installing a confined version of microk8s the command should be `sudo adduser $USER snap_microk8s`

Author: Updated to use `snap_microk8s` group instead. Thanks.

# Create and provide ownership of '~/.kube' directory to current user
mkdir -p ~/.kube
sudo chown -f -R ${USER} ~/.kube

# Put the group membership changes into effect

> newgrp microk8s

Reviewer 2: Same here: `newgrp snap_microk8s`

```

Once done, the status of the MicroK8s can be verified with

```bash
microk8s status --wait-ready

> ```

Reviewer: One of the good practices of Tutorial is that sometimes it is good to provide the output of important commands, even in some easier to read form. 

Like saying:

The output of the command should read something like 

```
microk8s is running
high-availability: no
  datastore master nodes: 127.0.0.1:19001
  datastore standby nodes: none
addons:
  enabled:
    dns                  # (core) CoreDNS
    ...
  disabled:
    ...
```

confirming that MicroK8s is indeed running, and providing an overview of which addons are enabled and disabled.

Author: Agreed. I've added output to the commands wherever it feels relevant for the user to know. Thanks.

Let's generate the Kubernetes configuration file using MicroK8s and write it to `~/.kube/config`

```bash
microk8s config | tee ~/.kube/config
```

In order to use Spark use S3 for object storage, we are going to use an S3 compliant object storage library `minio`, an add-on for which is shipped by default in `microk8s` installation. Let's install the addon and a few other addons.

```bash
sudo microk8s enable hostpath-storage dns rbac storage minio

sudo apt install jq
IPADDR=$(ip -4 -j route get 2.2.2.2 | jq -r '.[] | .prefsrc')
sudo microk8s enable metallb:$IPADDR-$IPADDR
```

> 

Reviewer: Here by leveraging on the status command above, we can also simply say:

Please confirm with the `microk8s status` command seen above that the addons have been corrently enabled.

Once you enable `minio` add-on, you will have a MinIO Kubernetes operator running in the K8s cluster. All the resources created for MinIO are created in the `minio-operator` namespace. You can verify these with the following commands:

```bash
kubectl get namespace minio-operator
kubectl get deployments -n minio-operator
kubectl get services -n minio-operator
kubectl get pods -n minio-operator
```

> We'll use `juju` to deploy `kafka`, `zookeeper`, `prometheus`, Spark history server and a bunch of other applications later to use together with Spark. For that reason, let's install and configure `juju`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll use `juju` to deploy and manage the Spark History Server and a number of other applications later to be integrated with Spark. Let's therefore install and configure a `juju` client using the snap:
```

```bash
sudo snap install juju --channel 3.1/stable

> mkdir -p ~/.local/share

Reviewer: I don't think this is really needed. I would skip parts that are not strictly required to obey the "less is more" rule

Author: The creation of `~/.local/share` directory was a necessary step for me when installing Juju on a fresh machine. It complained something about not being able to create that directory due to the constraints of snap.

Author: When this directory is not created, the following error is seen:
```
ubuntu@ip-172-31-23-133:~$ juju clouds
ERROR cannot create juju home directory: mkdir /home/ubuntu/.local: permission denied
WARNING Installing Juju in a strictly confined Snap. To ensure correct operation, create the ~/.local/share/juju directory manually.
```

> ```

Reviewer: **todo** Rather, I'm not sure we have ever bootstrapped the Juju controller here.

Author: Bootstrapping the Juju controller has been added in the Setup page.

MINIO_UI_IP=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.clusterIP}')
MINIO_UI_PORT=$(kubectl get service microk8s-console -n minio-operator -o jsonpath='{.spec.ports[0].port}')
export MINIO_UI_URL=$MINIO_UI_IP:$MINIO_UI_PORT

export S3_BUCKET="spark_tutorial"
```

These information can also be viewed on the console by running the `bin/check-minio.sh` script from the repository.

```bash
./bin/check-minio.sh
```

The repository also contains a Python script that creates a S3 bucket and copies some files we'll use later in the tutorial to the bucket. Run the `spark_bucket.py` script as:

```bash
python scripts/spark_bucket.py \
  --action create setup \
  --access-key $ACCESS_KEY \
  --secret-key $SECRET_KEY \
  --endpoint $S3_ENDPOINT \
  --bucket $S3_BUCKET
```

Once the script executes, the S3 bucket will be created successfully. Let's verify that using MinIO web UI as well. The IP and port in which MinIO web UI runs has already been exported to `MINIO_UI` earlier and can also be viewed by running the `./bin/check-minio.sh` script as demonstrated earlier.

> Open a browser and enter the URL. In the login page, enter the access key as the username and secret key as the password. Once you're logged in, browse through the `spark_tutorial` bucket. There you can see the a few files and directories copied over to the bucket.

Reviewer: Maybe we can briefly comment the scope of the three directories that we see there.

Author: The directories will be created wherever needed along with the explanation of their scope. So we can drop this paragraph altogether.

We will now create Kubernetes service accounts that will be used to run the Spark workloads. The creation of the service account can be done using the `spark-client` snap, which will create necessary roles, rolebindings and configurations along with the service account.

```bash
# Create namespace
kubectl create namespace spark

# Create service account
spark-client.service-account-registry create \
  --username spark --namespace spark \

>   --properties-file ./confs/s3.conf

Reviewer: I would say that it is worth pointing out that the s3 properties file provides the ability for the spark service account to read from s3.

Author: Noted.
